doc: crypto test doc (#1766)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: tests/crypto/README.rst

|                    | HKDF SHA512 |                                                                            | `RFC 5869 - HMAC-based Extract-and-Expand Key Derivation Function (HKDF)`_ |
+--------------------+-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| EC-JPAKE           | secp256r1   | `J-PAKE: Password-Authenticated Key Exchange by Juggling`_                 | Custom                                                                     |
+--------------------+-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Requirements
************

* One of the following development boards:

  * |nRF9160DK|
  * |nRF52840DK|
  * |nRF52DK|
  * |nRF51DK|

.. note::
   Nordic devices with smaller flash capacity, such as nRF51, nRF52810, or nRF52811 might not fit the full test suite.

>    A recommended approach in such case is to run the tests one by one.

Reviewer: Maybe state "subsets of the tests" istead of tests one by one, the current text may be misconstructed to mean one single test vector

Author: done

Building and running
********************

.. |test path| replace:: :file:`tests/crypto/`

.. include:: /includes/build_and_run_test.txt

There are multiple ways to build this test application.
See :ref:`nrf_security_readme` for additional information about nrf_security configuration.
You can use the following configuration files to build it in a specific setup:

* :file:`overlay-backend-sw.conf` - software only, except a hardware module to generate entropy for RNG
* :file:`overlay-backend-hw.conf` - hardware-accelerated using the Arm CryptoCell accelerator (for cryptography and entropy for RNG)
* :file:`overlay-backend-hw-sw.conf` - a combination of hardware acceleration using Arm CryptoCell and a software implementation that adds key sizes and algorithms not supported in CryptoCell (the setup uses hardware as much as possible)

.. _crypto_test_testing:

Testing
=======

> 1. Compile and program the application.

Reviewer: Do we have a link to show how to compile?

Author: In the section above, we refer the users to the [Building on the command line](https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/gs_programming.html#building-on-the-command-line) section which has this information.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29537761/82900745-46fd4600-9f5d-11ea-9b69-1dfba0e4f423.png)

Unless this is different for tests.

.. _crypto_test:

Cryptography tests
##################

Cryptography tests verify the functionality of the :ref:`nrf_security` by using known test vectors approved by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and others.

Overview
********

Cryptography tests use Zephyr Test Framework (Ztest) to run the tests.
See :ref:`test-framework` for details.

> This includes mechanisms of test reporting in RTT output in a specific format.

Reviewer: I think i would rewrite it to be "This includes **custom** mechanisms" to make the point clearer

> This includes mechanisms of test reporting in RTT output in a specific format.

Author: Re-written:
The tests do not use the standard Ztest output but provide custom output for the test reports.

See :ref:`crypto_test_ztest_custom` for details.

The tests are executed if the cryptographic functionality is enabled in Kconfig.

> Make sure to configure nrf_security and all available hardware or software backends to enable the tests.

Reviewer: Yes. I think that would be agreeable in this situation. enabling just CONFIG_NORDIC_SECURITY_BACKEND should make something runnable directly (by the default configurations on a given platform)

+--------------------+-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                    | HKDF SHA512 |                                                                            | `RFC 5869 - HMAC-based Extract-and-Expand Key Derivation Function (HKDF)`_ |
+--------------------+-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| EC-JPAKE           | secp256r1   | `J-PAKE: Password-Authenticated Key Exchange by Juggling`_                 | Custom                                                                     |
+--------------------+-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Requirements
************

* One of the following development boards:

  * |nRF9160DK|
  * |nRF52840DK|
  * |nRF52DK|
  * |nRF51DK|

.. note::

>    Nordic devices with smaller flash capacity, such as nRF51, nRF52810, or nRF52811 might not fit the full test suite.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The full test suite might not fit on Nordic devices with smaller flash capacity, such as nRF51, nRF52810, or nRF52811.
```
Not sure I like that wording, but "fit" must be used the other way around. Alternatively, you could write something like "Nordic devices such as ... cannot run the full test suite because of limited flash capacity".

Reviewer: @ru-fu: Your suggestion is better

Author: done

   A recommended approach in such case is to run subsets of the tests one by one.

Building and running
********************

.. |test path| replace:: :file:`tests/crypto/`

.. include:: /includes/build_and_run_test.txt

There are multiple ways to build the tests.

> See :ref:`nrf_security_readme` for additional information about nrf_security configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See :ref:`nrf_security_readme` for additional information about configuring of the Nordic Security Module.
```

Reviewer: Agreed

Author: done

You can use the following configuration files to build it in a specific setup:

* :file:`overlay-backend-sw.conf` - software only, except a hardware module to generate entropy for RNG
* :file:`overlay-backend-hw.conf` - hardware-accelerated using the Arm CryptoCell accelerator (for cryptography and entropy for RNG)
* :file:`overlay-backend-hw-sw.conf` - a combination of hardware acceleration using Arm CryptoCell and a software implementation that adds key sizes and algorithms not supported in CryptoCell (the setup uses hardware as much as possible)

> 

Reviewer 3: `overlay-backend-oberon.conf` got merged, should have an entry as well

Reviewer: > RTT for output is mentioned several times in the doc.
> Note that in the current master, output only shows up on UART.
> I made a little PR for this: #2362
> 
> When it's in, both UART and RTT will be on.

Oh. that is a little ouchie. Maybe we can write something along the lines of 

"will be outputed on either UART or RTT depending on configuration"

Author: @frkv  what would the description be for the nrf_oberon configuration?

Author: done, got a description from Torstein

.. _crypto_test_ztest_custom:

Ztest custom log formatting
===========================

Cryptography tests replace the standard Ztest formatting to assure more efficient reporting of running tests and test results.
Set the configuration option :option:`CONFIG_ZTEST_TC_UTIL_USER_OVERRIDE` to replace the Ztest macros ``TC_START`` and ``Z_TC_END_RESULT`` with versions more suited for reporting results of cryptographic tests.

> :option:`CONFIG_ZTEST_TC_UTIL_USER_OVERRIDE` uses :file:`./include_override/tc_util_user_override.h` to define the custom formatting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:option:`CONFIG_ZTEST_TC_UTIL_USER_OVERRIDE` uses :file:`tests/crypto/include_override/tc_util_user_override.h` to define the custom formatting.
```

Reviewer: Agreed

Author: done

.. _crypto_test_testing:

Testing
=======

1. Compile and program the application.
#. Observe the result of the different test vectors in the log using `RTT Viewer`_ or a terminal emulator.
   The last line of the output indicates the test result::

      PROJECT EXECUTION SUCCESSFUL

Additional test cases and test vectors
======================================

Test cases and test vectors can be added to the test suite either by including additional source files or by extending the existing files.

Test case
---------

A test case is a function designed to verify parts of the functionality of a cryptographic operation.
Most cryptographic operations, like hash calculations and ECDH, have multiple test cases to be able to cover all features.
A typical test case is called by looping over the registered test vectors and calling the test case.
The execution logs the verdict for each test vector.

An example of an HMAC test case in a simplified form is shown below::

> 

Reviewer 3: I would suggest adding `hmac_setup` here as well, which does three things:

- clears buffers s.t. state from previous test vectors isn't carried over
- gets a pointer to the next test vector via the macro `ITEM_GET`. `ITEM_GET` takes three args (hmac example follows):
    - test_vector_hmac_data: The section to fetch a test vector from, should correspond to the vector registration sector name
    - test_vector_hmac_t: Which type of test vector is expected to be found in the section given
    - hmac_vector_n: Which test vector to fetch (0 indexed)

And also what `hmac_teardown` does, which is simply to increase the `hmac_vector_n` counter s.t. the next iteration fetches the next test vector.

Reviewer: Can you come up with an alternate implemention so we can update this snippet?

Reviewer: @torsteingrindvik will come back with a new snippet after finishing some other work

Author: This comment led me to change the 'Test case' section and divide it into 3 subsections:
- Registering a test case - this was a bit further down but I think it should be first?
- Setting up a test case - based on info I got from @torsteingrindvik 
- Executing a test case - what we have here at the place of this comment

Let me know if that is fine @frkv

Reviewer: yes this is fine

   /* Initialize the HMAC module. */
   mbedtls_md_init(&md_context);

   const mbedtls_md_info_t *p_md_info =
	   mbedtls_md_info_from_type(p_test_vector->digest_type);
   err_code = mbedtls_md_setup(&md_context, p_md_info, 1);
   if (err_code != 0) {
	   LOG_WRN("mb setup ec: -0x%02X", -err_code);
   }
   TEST_VECTOR_ASSERT_EQUAL(err_code, 0);

   start_time_measurement();
   err_code = mbedtls_md_hmac_starts(&md_context, m_hmac_key_buf, key_len);
   TEST_VECTOR_ASSERT_EQUAL(err_code, 0);

   err_code =
	   mbedtls_md_hmac_update(&md_context, m_hmac_input_buf, in_len);
   TEST_VECTOR_ASSERT_EQUAL(err_code, 0);

   /* Finalize the HMAC computation. */
   err_code = mbedtls_md_hmac_finish(&md_context, m_hmac_output_buf);
   stop_time_measurement();

   TEST_VECTOR_ASSERT_EQUAL(p_test_vector->expected_err_code, err_code);

   /* Verify the generated HMAC. */
   TEST_VECTOR_ASSERT_EQUAL(expected_hmac_len, hmac_len);
   TEST_VECTOR_MEMCMP_ASSERT(m_hmac_output_buf, m_hmac_expected_output_buf,
	   		     expected_hmac_len,
			     p_test_vector->expected_result,
			     "Incorrect hmac");

   mbedtls_md_free(&md_context);
   }

Registering a test case
-----------------------

> A new test case must be registered to the ``test_case_data`` section using ITEM_REGISTER which registers it with the named section ``test_case_hmac_data``::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new test case must be registered to the ``test_case_data`` section using ITEM_REGISTER, which registers it with the named section ``test_case_hmac_data``::
```

Reviewer: Agreed

   .teardown = hmac_teardown,
   .vector_type = TV_HMAC,
   .vectors_start = __start_test_vector_hmac_data,
   .vectors_stop = __stop_test_vector_hmac_data,
   };

.. note::
   The macro call to ITEM_REGISTER must be done in a .c file.

Test vectors
------------

A test vector is a set of inputs and expected outputs to verify the functionality provided in a test case::

   typedef const struct {
	   const u32_t digest_type;        /**< Digest type of HMAC operation. */
	   const int expected_err_code;    /**< Expected error code from HMAC operation. */
	   const uint8_t expected_result;  /**< Expected result of HMAC operation. */
	   const char *p_test_vector_name; /**< Pointer to HMAC test vector name. */
	   const char
		   *p_input;                   /**< Pointer to input message in hex string format. */
	   const char *p_key;              /**< Pointer to HMAC key in hex string format. */
	   const char *p_expected_output;  /**< Pointer to expected HMAC digest in hex string format. */
   } test_vector_hmac_t;

Registering a test vector
-------------------------

Test vectors are added by registering them for a section defined in the test case code.

> The test vector is registered in the section ``test_vector_hmac_data`` which is defined in the test case example ``exec_test_case_hmac``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The test vector is registered in the section ``test_vector_hmac_data``, which is defined in the test case example ``exec_test_case_hmac``.
```

Reviewer: Agreed

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new test case must be registered to the ``test_case_data`` section using ITEM_REGISTER, which registers it with the named section ``test_case_hmac_data``::

   ITEM_REGISTER(test_case_hmac_data, test_case_t test_hmac) = {
   .p_test_case_name = "HMAC",
   .setup = hmac_setup,
   .exec = exec_test_case_hmac,
   .teardown = hmac_teardown,
   .vector_type = TV_HMAC,
   .vectors_start = __start_test_vector_hmac_data,
   .vectors_stop = __stop_test_vector_hmac_data,
   };

.. note::
   The macro call to ITEM_REGISTER must be done in a .c file.

Setting up a test case
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As part of the test case setup, any previously used buffers are cleared.
Then, the next test vector is fetched using the ``ITEM_GET`` macro.
The macro requires the following parameters:
 * ``test_vector_hmac_data`` - the section to fetch the test vector from (HMAC in this example).
 * ``test_vector_hmac_t`` - information about which type of test vector to expect in the given section.
   In the example, ``test_vector_hmac_t`` is expected, the same type that is used when registering HMAC test vectors.
 * Information about which index to fetch a test vector from.

> 

Reviewer 3: The last setup step is not described, maybe add something like:
```suggestion
Lastly, the test vector fetched is unhexified.
Test vector data is stored as strings of hexadecimal characters.
In order to use them, they must be parsed to binary, which this step does.
```

Author: added in a slightly changed form , please checke @torsteingrindvik

Reviewer 3: > The fetched test vector is then unhexified and its data is stored as strings of hexadecimal characters.

Could you reword this? It sounds like the data is actively at runtime being stored as hex chars by unhexify.

Author: split the sentence into two

.. _crypto_test:

Cryptography tests
##################

Cryptography tests verify the functionality of the :ref:`nrf_security` by using known test vectors approved by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and others.

Overview
********

Cryptography tests use Zephyr Test Framework (Ztest) to run the tests.
See :ref:`zephyr:test-framework` for details.
The tests do not use the standard Ztest output but provide custom output for the test reports.
See :ref:`crypto_test_ztest_custom` for details.

The tests are executed if the cryptographic functionality is enabled in Kconfig.

> Make sure to configure nrf_security and all available hardware or software backends to enable the tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to configure the :ref:`nrfxlib:nrf_security` and all available hardware or software backends to enable the tests.
```

Author: done

+--------------------+-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| EC-JPAKE           | secp256r1   | `J-PAKE: Password-Authenticated Key Exchange by Juggling`_                 | Custom                                                                     |
+--------------------+-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Requirements
************

* One of the following development boards:

  * |nRF9160DK|
  * |nRF5340DK|
  * |nRF52840DK|
  * |nRF52DK|
  * |nRF51DK|

.. note::
   Nordic devices such as nRF51, nRF52810, or nRF52811 cannot run the full test suite because of limited flash capacity.
   A recommended approach in such case is to run subsets of the tests one by one.

Building and running
********************

.. |test path| replace:: :file:`tests/crypto/`

.. include:: /includes/build_and_run_test.txt

There are multiple ways to build the tests.

> See :ref:`nrf_security_readme` for additional information about configuring of the Nordic Security Module.

Reviewer 2: The docs in nrfxlib are inconsistent in capitalization of Nordic Security Module. This should really be fixed there, but as a workaround, you could link to the landing page in nrfxlib instead of the subpage.

Author: agreed

> See :ref:`nrf_security_readme` for additional information about configuring of the Nordic Security Module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See :ref:`nrf_security_readme` for additional information about configuring the Nordic Security Module.
```
or
```suggestion
See :ref:`nrf_security_readme` for additional information about configuration of the Nordic Security Module.
```
Sorry, that was wrong in the suggestion. ;)

> You can use the following configuration files to build it in a specific setup:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the following configuration files to build a test in a specific setup:
```
Not sure if that is correct or if your talking about the Nordic Security Module here? If you're referring to the tests, you used plural before, so "it" is wrong.

:option:`CONFIG_ZTEST_TC_UTIL_USER_OVERRIDE` uses :file:`tests/crypto/include_override/tc_util_user_override.h` to define the custom formatting.

.. _crypto_test_testing:

Testing
=======

1. Compile and program the application.
#. Observe the result of the different test vectors in the log using `RTT Viewer`_ or a terminal emulator.
   The last line of the output indicates the test result::

      PROJECT EXECUTION SUCCESSFUL

Additional test cases and test vectors
======================================

Test cases and test vectors can be added to the test suite either by including additional source files or by extending the existing files.

Test case
---------

A test case is a function designed to verify parts of the functionality of a cryptographic operation.
Most cryptographic operations, like hash calculations and ECDH, have multiple test cases to be able to cover all features.
A typical test case is called by looping over the registered test vectors and calling the test case.
The execution logs the verdict for each test vector.

Registering a test case
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A new test case must be registered to the ``test_case_data`` section using ITEM_REGISTER, which registers it with the named section ``test_case_hmac_data``::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new test case must be registered to the ``test_case_data`` section using ``ITEM_REGISTER``, which registers it with the named section ``test_case_hmac_data``::
```

   ITEM_REGISTER(test_case_hmac_data, test_case_t test_hmac) = {
   .p_test_case_name = "HMAC",
   .setup = hmac_setup,
   .exec = exec_test_case_hmac,
   .teardown = hmac_teardown,
   .vector_type = TV_HMAC,
   .vectors_start = __start_test_vector_hmac_data,
   .vectors_stop = __stop_test_vector_hmac_data,
   };

.. note::

>    The macro call to ITEM_REGISTER must be done in a .c file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The macro call to ``ITEM_REGISTER`` must be done in a .c file.
```

Setting up a test case
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As part of the test case setup, any previously used buffers are cleared.
Then, the next test vector is fetched using the ``ITEM_GET`` macro.
The macro requires the following parameters:
 * ``test_vector_hmac_data`` - the section to fetch the test vector from (HMAC in this example).
 * ``test_vector_hmac_t`` - information about which type of test vector to expect in the given section.
   In the example, ``test_vector_hmac_t`` is expected, the same type that is used when registering HMAC test vectors.
 * Information about which index to fetch a test vector from.

The fetched test vector is then unhexified and its data is stored as strings of hexadecimal characters.
In order to use them, they must be parsed to binary, which is also done in the setup procedure.

> The following is example of a test vector setup::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows a test vector setup::
```
